people are actually stuck in
relationships and jobs financially stuck
becoming much lonelier as a species but
there is a way to get unstuck and we're
going to find out right now Adam alter
New York Times best-selling author and
psychologist this episode is for people
who are stuck in their careers
relationship or any aspect of life and
how to become unstuck the career model
for how we live our lives professionally
is broken as you specialize you have
less Variety in what you do and there's
a massive Rising loneliness and
depression and anxiety and part of the
reason for that is we don't share our
stuckness and they also have no idea how
common it is so what is the relationship
between perseverance or knowing when to
quit research basically shows that it's
a good idea to persevere beyond the
point where you say this is hard and I
feel stuck how long you should do that
is another question and the best example
of this is an idea known as the creative
Cliff illusion and it's this illusion
where you that's when the good stuff
comes if you persevere how do you teach
someone to be that kind of person there
are two things one thing is
I remember reading about the studies
where people would rather take an
electric shock than to sit idly on their
own it's a brilliant study they've tried
it already so they know it hurts but
it's so reversive to just sit with our
own thoughts for even half an hour
two-thirds of them go and start playing
with this machine so what we found is
that we don't pay enough attention to
what will be good for us and that's
often when we get stuck what we need to
do then if you want to be able to get
unstuck quickly the best thing you can
do is
have you ever been stuck
are you stuck in an area of your life
right now
I think you are and I say that because I
think to some degree we all are some of
us more than others and that is exactly
why I had to have this conversation with
Adam alter the guy that literally wrote
the book about being stuck and how to
know if you are and maybe most
importantly of all how to get unstuck
Adam is a master of what he calls the
art of the Breakthrough which is really
looking at why some people fail why they
get stuck and why others don't he's also
a genius when it comes to marketing and
psychology he's the professor of
marketing and psychology at one of the
top schools in America he kind of just
knows why people do what they do and how
to help them do something else how do we
know if the decisions we're making in
our life right now in all the areas of
our life are the right decisions or the
wrong decisions Adam has scientifically
backed answers to all of these questions
he is refreshing he is positive and he
is full of just as many important
questions as he is valuable
life-changing answers I feel so much
richer for having this conversation with
Adam and I know you will too
enjoy
[Music]
from an academic standpoint who are you
I am a professor of marketing and
psychology so I'm very interested in
business but also interested in the
psychological side of it so how do
consumers behave how do they think what
do they buy how do they spend their time
and money and other resources
I'm incredibly interested and curious
about
all of your books specifically
this book here
anatomy of a breakthrough and also your
your first book drunk tank pink
because this book helps people to get
unstuck why did you decide to write a
book called anatomy of a breakthrough
and you know what writing books takes a
huge amount of time and effort and
you're a man that has many things he
could be doing so why was this so
important that you chose to write about
it it's something that I've been
thinking about in some form or another
for years literally I'd say 25 years I I
I've been stuck a lot in my life and so
even before I became intellectually
interested in the topic it was a factor
that had had a big effect on the way I
was living my life and I wanted to
understand whether there was maybe a
road map that I could present to other
people that would help them get unstuck
but I think the real answer is there was
some research that I was doing in I
think this would have been in about 2005
and I found this really interesting
cultural difference in how people
anticipate or expect change in the world
and so what we found is that people in
the west people in places like the US
Canada the UK Australia New Zealand they
tend to be blindsided by change so if
you give them five days in a row and you
show that it's been rainy for five days
or sunny for five days they anticipate
that that's going to continue and they
think the same about the stock market
and other other variables that can shift
or stay the same but but if you do that
with people in East Asia Japan South
Korea China when they see a pattern
that's gone a particular way for a while
they think that it's about to change and
what that does is it means that they're
much more Nimble in the face of change
whereas in the west people tend to be
blindsided by it and it makes us
especially slow at coming to grips with
the idea that the world's changed and we
need to Pivot in order to get unstuck
can you give me you know the the most
popular examples
of being stuck that my listeners now
could relate to yeah I've been running
this survey for about five years on
people all around the world asking them
with that definition of stuckness are
you stuck in some way and I find that
people usually within about 15 seconds
start typing a response which means that
stuckness is very top of mind and their
responses vary so some of them are
financially stuck they want to be able
to save or they want to be able to earn
more money some of them are stuck in
relationships some are stuck in jobs a
lot of them are stuck quite narrowly in
Creative Pursuits like I'm trying to
learn this piano piece I'm trying to
learn this new art technique I'm a
filmmaker and I can't come up with
creative ideas I'm a business person and
I can't figure out what my next venture
should be so there's a there's a very
broad range and I find that almost
everyone in at least one respect with a
bit of time comes up with something they
say I'm stuck in this way and then they
can express it is there a trend in who's
getting stuck more often yeah so I have
a pet Theory I think um the kind of
career model for for how we live our
lives professionally is broken for most
people I think what happens is as you
specialize you're supposed to get more
and more narrow in what you do and you
have less Variety in what you do and
that's how you get stuck is by doing the
same thing every day and there's a huge
amount of evidence for that in all sorts
of different areas Actuarial science for
me at least very quickly put me into
that little pigeonholed spot where I
felt I was getting trapped and it was
only going to increase and so the thing
I've done ever since is to try to create
as much Variety in my professional life
as possible because then if you don't
like aspect number one but you have nine
other aspects to your job you can go and
do that for a little while and so
bouncing around I think is critical for
getting unstuck often very smart people
get very very interested in very narrow
topics and that's that's essentially the
definition of a PhD is you spend a huge
amount of time becoming an expert in a
very narrow area
and I think that's fine for a PhD itself
but if you're going to make a whole life
out of doing that I think if you're a
Restless intellectually curious person
you're going to get stuck really fast
you almost become a victim to being good
at something in life don't you because
you get promoted and promoted and
promoted up in that direction and your
label whatever it is doctor dentist
lawyer becomes reinforced by your own
success at that thing and you can get 10
years down the line at something and go
how the [__] am I living next to the
office I'm a lawyer it's doing law 14
hours a day what happened to that violin
I used to play and we become you're
right we become really narrow
individuals and when you think about
what a human is we're so multifaceted
especially when we're younger yeah we're
doing all of these things it's a real
shame I also think what happens is you
get promoted and it does get narrow but
it also changes so the thing that you
were really good at is no longer the
thing that you're doing and a lot of
what happens in promotion especially
professionally is you become a manager
and you manage people who do the thing
you love instead of doing the thing you
love and so that's how you get stuck as
well is by by being promoted out of the
thing that got you passionate about what
you were doing and being told no instead
you're going to watch other people do
the thing you love now you suddenly have
to be a people manager which some people
like doing but a lot don't and so that's
also inherent in the kind of
professional models that we have in
hierarchical organizations
this happens by
I guess in part by being a bit
unconscious about
what you want yeah and you just kind of
take what you're given so you take the
promotion and you take this and you take
the the relocation to this place and how
do we prevent that happening I I think
that's the job of people who write about
these subjects right and that's kind of
what I saw as as the mission for this
book was to try to say you know if you
don't want to be stuck or if you want to
be able to get unstuck quickly there's a
set of questions you can ask yourself
and let me just lay them out for you
here they are in fact the last thing in
the book is a hundred ways to get
unstuck it's just a digestion of all
these ideas and I think those are
questions that people don't often ask
themselves you're right there's a sort
of accidental
way that we live our lives and we take
what's given and if someone says here's
a promotion you hear that word and you
grab onto it and you you write it as far
as you can but um I think it's it's easy
to be a little bit mindless about where
your life takes you and and sometimes
that's fine but in a lot of cases it's
not and
book tries in in the book I try to
distinguish those cases from from each
other like when should you let life lead
you and when should you be a little more
purposeful
on that exact point I've mulled over the
last couple of weeks this idea that
there's kind of two narratives that
Prevail in our lives kind of two
instructors one of them is this external
narrative it could come from your
parents or society's expectation of you
taking that promotion or thinking that
that job is a admirable job for you to
take so you take it that's the external
narrative then the other narrative
if I can call it that is how you feel
yeah and I think we're we're conditioned
to care more about that external
narrative because the rewards seem to be
more aligned with the external narrative
than like how you feel because if people
really were orientated by how they felt
in that job in that relationship in that
City whatever in that course at
University
um they would make significantly
different decisions but we always it's
almost like we've tuned out of that yeah
I I think the problem is that humans
don't know how they feel in isolation as
well if I took you and put you in a room
for a week and said you can have food
and water and you can have your thoughts
and I took you out of after a week and
said so what are you thinking like
what's real what's not real what do you
believe what are your preferences and
values you'd struggle it's there's a lot
of really interesting evidence that if
you isolate humans they don't really
know what to do with themselves so those
external forces that there's a kind of
permeability between what I'm feeling
inside my head and thinking and what
these other forces are suggesting to me
so I think I think it's totally true
that we don't pay enough attention to
what will be good for us separate from
what other people think we should be
doing but I also don't even think many
of us know the answers to those
questions not all the time but about a
lot of things like I know
deep somewhere I know that I love to
draw that I mean I'm at peace when I'm
drawing and painting I haven't done that
for a really long time I'm too busy to
your point of being too focused but I
know that that's something that
preference wise I love doing
but then the question should I make my
career and my life about that the only
way I knew how to answer that was by
speaking to lots of people who said it's
very difficult to become an artist
here's the path it's probably going to
be hard to make any money
so keep it as a hobby but but knowing
just based on my feelings what to do I
wouldn't have known what to do as a
young person and so I think that's
that's part of the problem is that it's
not just that we're
silly for kind of paying attention to
others it's also that I don't even know
if we know in isolation without those
inputs what the right kinds of paths are
you said about putting me in a room and
leaving me with my thoughts that sounded
like hell it does yeah and as you I
remember reading about the studies where
people would rather take an electric
shock
than to sit idly on their own yeah and
they tested people and they said would
you rather take an electric shock or sit
here for a couple of minutes on your own
and people took
it's a it's a brilliant study I mean the
way they set it up is brilliant because
they get you to sit in this room and
they do it with men and women they're
mostly college undergrads and they say
to them you're just going to be sitting
here for half an hour there's a little
machine in the corner it delivers
electric shocks they've tried it already
so they know it hurts it doesn't feel
good and they're told you know you can
sit with your thoughts or you know the
machines there if you want to go and use
it which is a bizarre thing to say to
people and they sit there for a while
and time passes
and uh the vast majority of them go I
think it's two-thirds of them go and
start playing with this machine it's so
aversive to just sit with our own
thoughts for even half an hour that we
need stimulation even if it's negative
stimulation
and you wrote a book about this this
subject matter about addiction and
screens and all of these things this
sort of incessant need for distraction
that we seem to have developed what was
your biggest sort of takeaway in
learning from that process of putting
that book together
the biggest thing for me was I'd always
imagine that addiction and the need for
this kind of stimulation was a sort of
personality thing like you you either
have that personality or you don't but I
became absolutely convinced by not only
by the book and what I was researching
but by understanding how many of us fall
prey to these devices that this is
universal it's just about being human
that if you know how to push the right
buttons in a human you can turn that
human as you can with rats and monkeys
and other animals into into a bit of a
fiend for whatever the thing is that it
needs and the people who design the
platforms that we use are so good at
that job and they have so much data to
to perfect what they've done that
ultimately the platforms they design for
us are are like crack they're very very
difficult for us to resist
you talk about in drunk tank pink how
people behave differently when they're
in the presence of others and I found
that really really curious could you
just give me a flavor of the some of the
studies and insights you gained from
that because that kind of links to what
you're saying there about how living
behind screens might Decay our Humanity
a little bit Yeah well I think part of
it is just that the best versions of
ourselves come out when we're around
other people
um we are much much more likely to be
civil and decent to other people when
they're around when we see them and when
we spend time around them that kind of
shared social Space is really important
it's also really interesting when we're
around other people
um we we tend to default to the thing
that we are most like likely to do in
any moment so there's a lot of good
evidence with this like if you if you
take a champion cyclist you put him or
her on a bike a stationary bike
that person will go faster in the
presence of other people than alone and
there's something about this kind of
they call it latent energy this is a
very old psychological study that talks
about latent energy that is liberated
from us when we're in the presence of
other people so if you're trying to
learn something new you know you imagine
you're in class at school and there's a
teacher who's staring over your shoulder
that's terrible because we don't really
know how to take on board new
information we're just overwhelmed by
the cognitive load of that experience
but if it's something you're good at you
will be extra good at it in front of
other people there's something about
being energized by others so if I work
out with someone then I'm more likely to
You'll lift more you'll run faster and
so on yeah pretty reliably
in that book as well um before we get on
to being unstuck there were some other
things that I found really curious I was
Keen to ask you about
um this is your that was your first book
drunk tank pink you see how
our names have a huge bearing on our
outcomes across various facets of our
life yeah that's quite it's quite
shocking to me because my name is
something that we don't choose and it
seems to be so simple and slightly
irrelevant yeah
yeah it's it's true I mean there are
lots of different ways names influence
us
um one of these little demonstrations
that I do when I give talks on this
subject is I'll I'll present the letters
of the Roman alphabet the 26 letters
that we we understand to be the letters
in the English language and I'll ask
people to think about their three
favorite letters
and then I say now put your hand up in
the room if one of those at least was
the first letter of your first name
middle name or last name and almost
every hand goes up so these are letters
who has preferences for letters it's a
bizarre thing to have to answer but we
do and it's because this that these
letters are such a strong expression of
who we are it's a it's a part of our ego
that's contained in the letters of our
name and so even that alone shows the
power of names over us that they are
such a strong reflection of who we are
and our identity uh so that's the first
thing and you find interesting effects
from this actually if you look at the
Hurricanes that we name in the U.S
or that you name around the world in
other places you get much more donation
Aid if the hurricane name matches your
initial so they found that when
Hurricane Katrina came through and
devastated New Orleans people whose
names began with a K donated way more
than people whose names didn't begin
with a k the same for a whole lot of
other hurricanes with other initials the
other big thing is the ease with which
people can pronounce your name so that
seems to have a really big effect on all
sorts of outcomes if people can
pronounce your name there's this kind of
sense of familiarity it's if that's the
the breaking of the ice happens over
that first pronunciation of your name
obviously the easier it is to say the
name the less anxiety you have about it
I guess the more smoothly that breaking
of the ice goes and there's a lot of
evidence from some of my own research we
looked for example at how quickly people
rise up through Law Firm hierarchies how
quickly do they become partners
and there's a period in the middle of
careers in like the about the 10th to
the 20th year of a career for a lawyer
where there's a premium you're much more
likely to become a partner several
percent more likely to become a partner
earlier if your name is pronounceable
and I think what's what's happening
there is
if I'm a partner at a firm and there are
a lot of young Associates and I'm trying
to put together a team if there's
someone with a name that's easy to
pronounce and someone whose name I'm
anxious about pronouncing I don't know
how to pronounce it I will default to
the one who's easy to pronounce I'm not
trying to be rude about it but in that
moment it just seems easier it's the
path of least resistance and that's how
humans act much of the time is there not
an element of um discrimination and
Prejudice associated with that because I
think if a name was easier to pronounce
it's probably familiar it's therefore
probably culturally popular they're
probably like me you know like a Jack or
like a Stephen
but if it's a a name that I've not seen
trying to figure out causality here it
could be because they're foreign you
know my mother I always think about this
my mother's from Nigeria and she could
have given me like a traditional
Nigerian name right but she called me
Stephen and I think
you know I was also born in Botswana in
Africa um I think had she called me
something else my life probably would
have been quite different in all honesty
and I worked for four years on
phones doing like telesales yeah and
when you call up and your name is
Stephen in the UK and you sound like I
do yeah I think any Prejudice someone
might have had because of the color of
my skin or where I'm from
um
vanishes is there any evidence to
support that yeah so there are two
things one thing is absolutely the
Prejudice that goes along with having a
foreign sounding name uh and there's
evidence for example in the United
States there's a study where thousands
of CVS were mailed out and applications
for jobs either with a traditionally
white name or a traditionally black name
as we think of them in the United States
based on the demographic naming Trends
and especially for the ones that were
kind of in the middle of the pack not
especially strong and not especially
weak there's a huge premium to having
the traditionally white name so there's
a lot of prejudice that goes on with
naming but also in the studies we did we
went out a partial out this specific
effect of fluency of how easy it was to
pronounce so we restricted our analysis
in the one case to just white lawyers
who were born in that particular country
and so you find the same effect even
there that the white lawyers with white
names that were easier to pronounce
tended to do a little bit better but
you're right I think a huge part of it
is prejudice and discrimination what
about our environment our surroundings
how does that have an impact on how
we're feeling in our behavior from from
what you learn writing your first book
yeah so I focused a lot on uh physical
environments things like natural
environments the power of nature to to
replenish Us in general which which
sounds like a kind of non-scientific
idea but there's a huge amount of
science to this idea that
if you happen to spend a lot of time in
urban environments and then you go to a
place where you have say a running
stream or win through the leaves on a
tree or something like that it's deeply
replenishing it it has all sorts of
amazing psychological and emotional
effects I was also very very interested
in the effects of of the weather and of
colors around us and how those shape our
our experiences of the world so there's
a some of it's not all that surprising
but uh you see even in baseball matches
in the United States when the game is
being played on a warmer night there is
more aggressive behavior you see huge
rises in crime things like that on hot
nights
um and then with colors you know that's
really the centerpiece of the book I'm
colorblind so I've always been
fascinated by color but the title of the
book drunk tank pink is specifically
about this color that is used to paint
the inside of jail cells in some places
and it's a color that's supposed to
pacify people it's like this bright
bubble gum pink color and they've found
quite a lot of evidence for the last 30
or 40 years now that there's something
about this color that does seem to calm
people down at least initially pink it's
bright bubble gum pink yeah
and it sedates people briefly and then
they go then there's a backlash effect
but yeah oh really yeah they found that
if you leave people in there for too
long apparently there's a backlash yeah
hitchhikers should wear red
yeah this is uh this is a research
looking at how how essentially
attractive we are to other people
depending on the colors we're wearing
um and the the early studies were done
on online dating platforms where you
have the same picture of a person and
you you photoshop the shirt they're
wearing this is true for men and women
and it doesn't matter whether they're
trying to attract men or women but
there's something about the color red in
particular that's really attractive to
humans and actually to other animals too
um and when you see the color red it
inspires a kind of approach oriented
behavior so where you might have passed
that person by if you're thinking about
dating apps and you're swiping there's
something about the color red that's
that slows you down and attracts you and
in the context of hitchhiking it has a
similar effect especially when you you
have a heterosexual male driving and you
have a woman wearing a red shirt you get
a very strong effect so if I'm trying to
find a girlfriend or a boyfriend
you're saying
make sure they're not wearing red make
sure they're not wearing red well if
they're wearing red you've got to ask
yourself am I attracted to the red shirt
or am I attracted to the person whereas
if they're wearing another color it's
much more likely to be an unbiased
unvarnished opinion of them but if I
want to attract the opposite oh if you
want to attract wear red yeah okay
that's useful to know yeah
I am not single but um
yeah oh but even for your partner this
is probably why Conor McGregor's has
this famous saying where he says it's
red panty night all right so when he
wins a fight he I think he said it on
the microphone to Joe Rogan he said oh
it's red panty night tonight which means
that him and his wife are going to be
intimate yeah yeah but red is always for
whatever reason in society been
seductive hasn't it's always been as it
relates to lingerie I wonder if lingerie
sells are more in red than others
quick one before we get back to this
episode just give me 30 seconds of your
time
two things I wanted to say the first
thing is a huge thank you for listening
and tuning in to the show week after
week means the world to all of us and
this really is a dream that we
absolutely never had and couldn't have
imagined getting to this place
secondly it's a dream where we feel like
we're only just getting started and if
you enjoy what we do here please join
the 24 of people who watch this channel
regularly and have hit that subscribe
button means more than I can say and if
you hit that subscribe button here's a
promise I'm going to make to you I'm
gonna do everything in my power to make
this show as good as I can now and into
the future we're going to deliver the
guests that you want me to speak to and
we're going to continue to keep doing
all of the things you love about the
show
thank you thank you so much back to the
episode so getting getting to the topic
of being unstuck then which is what the
anatomy of a breakthrough is all about
what does it feel like when someone is
stuck so how do I know if I'm stuck what
is there an emotional sort of you know
sensation yeah it's an interesting
question so it's it's subjective you
know if you're Stucky you can feel it
because you could be in the same
situation and not feel stuck I'll give
you a good example of this I had a
conversation with Malcolm Gladwell who
was telling me about his dad who is a
math professor and his dad was trying to
solve a math conundrum for 30 years
by external definitions he was stuck for
30 years because he couldn't solve this
math puzzle which is a common experience
for math professors I imagine but he
loved it he didn't think of himself as
being stuck that for him was the process
that was why he went to work and why he
kept doing what he was doing and so you
know I if I thought about being stuck in
something and not making meaningful
progress objectively for 30 years the
idea drives me crazy but for his dad for
Malcolm's dad that that was something
that was really appealing he really
enjoyed that process and so I think a
lot of of dealing with being stuck at
first is getting your head around what
it means to be stuck and figuring out
that usually it's not as big a deal as
it seems it might be and once you come
to grips with the emotional part of it
you can usually bring some sort of
strategies and actions to bear and and
to start to move yourself I'm convinced
of that and that's that's why I wrote
the book because I think there is a way
to get unstuck in almost every case
what is the in your view the
relationship between perseverance
becoming unstuck or knowing when to quit
yeah I mean there's a there's an amazing
cottage industry on both sides of that
spectrum of books that are being written
that I think are excellent books that
make the case for for both of those ends
of the spectrum you've got Angela
Duckworth's grit which is all about
sticking through and and continuing on
and I think anatomy of a breakthrough
leans in that direction and then you've
got Annie Duke who wrote the book quit
which is about quitting the fact that
we've got so many options all the time
most of us why would you keep doing the
thing you're doing if it's not working
out for you you should probably do
something else now they're both very
sophisticated thinkers they wouldn't say
you should always persevere or always
quit
but it's a great question how do you
know when you are stuck that it's time
to persevere versus time to quit and I
think it's worth thinking about a the
opportunity cost so what are you leaving
behind is there something else that's
very obvious that would be an easy thing
to jump to that would require leaving
behind the thing that's making you stuck
and if that idea seems really appealing
as it did for me when I was doing
Actuarial science and wanted to jump
away from that then you should probably
consider moving on but the the research
basically shows that almost always
it's a good idea to persevere beyond the
point where you say this is hard and
it's not feeling good and I feel stuck
how long you should do that is another
question I think one of the the guides
that should should be useful in
determining that is to ask yourself
if there's an end state that I'm trying
to approach am I getting closer to it
across time you know if I'm I'm learning
a new skill is the Delta between where I
am and where I'd like to be shrinking
over time the gap between those two
shrinking or is it staying the same or
is it even getting larger and if it's
staying the same or getting larger then
I'm probably not getting closer and
that's that's a good a good indication
that I should probably quit it's time to
move on I've thought a lot about this
and in my last book I wrote a chapter
about quitting and I was trying to
figure out why I appear to be quite a
good quitter I'm well known for quitting
school my first company my second
company
um university after one lecture and this
is the quitting framework I try to draw
up okay I'm gonna just slide it across
the desk and please ask me if you've got
any questions
so there's two kind of routes you can
get on the quick framework is it are you
thinking of quitting because it's hard
you're running a marathon it's the last
mile of the race it's hard but it's
worth it yep so if it's hard and it's
not worth it quit if it's hard and it's
worth it stay the course
um going down the other side it's that
could be a relationship a place you're
living the job you have as an actuary
whatever yeah um
so so this this framework seems to me
unassailable in other words there's
nothing I can't imagine that anything
here could be disagreed with because it
makes total sense and it's nice and
Broad it's it's nice and Broad right
yeah you can imagine any situation being
folded into it I the other thing I quite
like about it is that uh this
distinction between it's just hard and
it sucks is is very Central to a lot of
the ideas in in my book and I think if
something sucks it's emotionally
unrewarding and you hate it and you're
grinding through it
most of the time you should quit and and
you have here this one limb to your
model that says if you can make it suck
less continue on very often yeah right
talking to your boss right exactly and
so there's there's Great Value in asking
that question but uh it's just hard part
I'm focusing on because a huge part of
this book is about how hardship is the
first step in making something good yeah
good stuff happens when things are hard
and because we're human and we have been
evolutionarily I don't know pinned into
the situation where hardship is seen as
a problem like we're using too many
resources don't do something that's
harder than it needs to be we're very
used to that it's not true about
everything we do but it's true about
enough things that we misinterpret
hardship or hardness for being a problem
whereas in many domains the good stuff
only happens almost every time after it
gets hard
um in in many domains for human growth
and otherwise in your book you talk
about how
you know you kind of debunked the idea
that young people
um start the best most culturally
valuable
companies we tend to think that it's
like 21 year olds in their bedroom that
are starting all the great
tech companies for example but you show
that
a couple of failures is actually seems
to be correlate with success yeah
and there's a you know that whole
section felt like a bit of narrative
shift
yeah I mean it was it was a it was a big
thing for me that um
you know one of the ideas that's very
prominent in my field is this
availability heuristic it's this idea
that you pay a lot of attention to
what's most available in the world this
is an old idea from uh from Danny
Kahneman and amosversky behavioral
decision researchers and um the thing
that we see a lot of is very successful
young people because they're interesting
they're fascinating stories so you you
you're interested in them and a lot of
the biggest companies I think are run
especially tech companies by quite young
CEOs or people who began when they were
young
and so we fixate on them and they're
available in our minds we see
documentaries about them we read about
them all the time
but they're they're vanishingly rare and
so what you find is that the the age to
begin a company if you want to maximize
success if you look at the age of the
CEOs who tend to be very very successful
we're talking like mid-40s that's The
Sweet Spot mid 40s even into 50s and the
the thing that distinguishes a 22 year
old from a 45 year old is as you said
partly failure that by the time you're
45 you've doubled how long you've been
alive you've had a lot of time to fail
and to come back from that and so if
you're still creating companies you've
learned something along the way but also
your life is deeply Rich at that point
in a way that it isn't necessarily as a
22 year old you've got a lot of other
stuff going on good stuff and bad stuff
maybe and maybe complicated stuff but
all of it is kind of adding a spice to
the mix that I think makes your ideas
thicker in some way and and makes you I
think better at making certain
calculations that maybe when you're
younger you don't have all the
information for and so that's what you
find who's more creative young people or
middle-aged people or old people it's
interesting so
young people and I'm thinking especially
about kids because I have a
five-year-old and a seven-year-old
um they are phenomenally creative and in
part they're creative because they don't
accept anything they're curious about
everything my kids will not ask a
question without a follow-up or five or
ten or Twenty follow-ups right nothing
is okay until we've explored it to the
ends of the Earth and that's amazing and
that's why kids learn so much so quickly
they take nothing for granted there's no
such thing as common wisdom to a kid
right you can say everyone does it this
way and they'll be like why but you say
that to an adult most of us say oh okay
we assume that what's the done thing the
way the herd is behaving is that way for
a reason even though often it's just
accidental or it's just the easiest
thing or whatever
and so I think very very young people
are tremendously creative because they
push back a lot but one of the really
interesting things for me in this book
is that I found people from Young
adulthood all the way through to very
old adulthood
um
very later in their lives who are
experimentalists by Nature they take
nothing for granted and they constantly
question and so they are way more
creative because they ask more questions
but then they then they say okay so here
are 10 options how do I know which one's
the best I'm going to inhabit each one
for two months and then you know in in
two years I'll know the answer and they
they do this serially and some of them
become Olympic athletes even if they
don't physically have the stature for it
because they're so good at finding new
techniques I talk about one of them in
the book some of them become business
Titans because they say that everyone
else is doing this thing and assuming
it's right here's a different thing
that's way better and I know that
because I've tried all the other options
and and they they end up being really
successful because that Curiosity that
you have in childhood when you carry it
over into adulthood it's kind of like a
superpower and so I I think um it's more
about the questions you ask than your
age I I couldn't agree more and it's one
of the most the things I I constantly am
trying to figure out how to get my team
when you said to me that there's a group
of there's a certain type of person that
just continues to keep asking why is the
age I was like can you introduce me yeah
because I'd love to hire them because
that's exactly you think about what
Innovation is at its core and it's that
that reject that kind of rejection of
convention yeah and that harder road
which is to try and reason up from first
principles per se yeah um you mentioned
an athlete yeah who are you referring to
yes there's an athlete Named Dave
burkhoff he was a an Olympic athlete in
the 1988 and 92 games
uh 88 in Seoul and 92 in Barcelona he's
a backstroke swimming swims 100 meter
backstroke and then some of the medley
races and I spoke to him for a while on
the phone to understand his experiences
because he um
he he doesn't look like a lot of other
backstroke swimmers they tend to be very
very tall the average world record
holder is six three to six four so quite
tall he's about 5 10. which is a big
difference in in professional Avenues if
you're thinking about it Olympic
athletes and um when he was when he was
a student in the mid 80s he was at
Harvard which is not a place you really
go if you're going to be a champion
swimmer it's a place you go for
intellectual experiences but it's not
the best athletic School generally
speaking but he had a coach there who
encouraged him to be curious to ask a
lot of questions and burkhoff was
naturally like this so he he would say
to his coach why would I why do I need
to swim that way like why don't I try
like 10 other ways to swim let's tweak
my technique in all these different ways
and see what works best and what he
ended up doing was he discovered that
you swim about 80 I think it's like 88
faster when you're fully submerged under
the water than when half of your body is
above the water and half is below which
makes total sense from a physics
perspective but most backstroke swimmers
the way they swim is they push off the
wall
and the minute they do that their body
starts to fight for oxygen because
they're under the water and so your
instinct is to pop up as quickly as
possible but if you can train yourself
to deal with the oxygen deprivation
you stay underwater for longer and you
swim much faster so burkhoff developed
this technique called the burkhov blast
off it was known as where he would swim
underwater for the first 40 meters of a
hundred meter race so 40 percent of the
race almost half of the almost a full
lap of the Olympic pool and then he
would come up there and then he would
keep swimming and he broke World Records
he wasn't the best swimmer in terms of
his physique but he was the best swimmer
strategically and he had spent years
experimenting to find this technique and
then of course all the other athletes
saw the same thing and they started
doing the same thing and so it became
more competitive but in the interim he
won gold medals at two Olympic Games
he won a bronze he was the world record
holder multiple times so you know that
questioning led someone who in certain
respects at least physically shouldn't
have been the world record holder to be
just that the question I ask is how do
you teach someone to be that kind of
person how do you teach someone to be
more experimental and to be more Curious
and to ask why more because just from my
observation from what I've seen over the
last I don't know 10 years in business
and I think about all the teams I've had
and all the people we've hired which is
more than a thousand
some people just have it yeah some
people just have a almost like a
cognitive but default towards being
curious about the possibility of a
better way and then some people
regardless of how many times you you ask
for that behavior or you might ride it
on the wall or you might say that it's
our values they just don't naturally
demonstrate that Curiosity
yeah I mean there's an individual
difference variable that you're
describing that's real and and with
every construct when we talk about a
desirable human trait there's going to
be variance right creativity uh
addictive personality and so on all of
these things are going to vary on a
spectrum some things that are educable
you can you can sort of teach them you
can make people better at them so if
you're at a three out of ten you can
become a six out of ten or maybe even a
seven out of ten uh this curiosity
question though I think
and I say this as an educator I think it
can be taught and I think that's
essentially what we try to do a lot of
the time that's my course I teach a
marketing course it's maybe three months
long if you only come out of that course
with one thing it's to know the right
questions to ask you know if you're in a
business and you're trying to promote a
product or an idea or to create a new
product I want you not necessarily to
know the answer but at least to know
what the questions should be and so I
think it's the job of Educators the job
of books the job of whatever information
you get in the world to train you in
that direction and so if I were going to
say there's one thing we should train
people in a business context you know if
you have a new employee
it's certainly the on on the job stuff
is important you know like learn the
skills that are important to this
specific job if there are technical
skills but the most important General
skill
know the right questions to ask and
constantly ask so here's one way you do
that is you say I want you to to look at
this thing whatever this thing is
um it could be it could be your
framework that you showed me the
quitting framework I would take everyone
who I'm considering hiring
and as a diagnostic tool I'd have them
look at it and say tell me one thing
that's not right with the framework or
that you think could be improved
do it again now give me a second thing
what about a third thing and if they
can't do it the first time coach them
through it work work through it with
them but don't just do it with your
framework do it with
find 10 ad campaigns say imagine you're
the chief marketing officer at this
company what's one thing you could do
differently that maybe isn't better but
at least is worth asking let's ask that
question
and and if you do that enough times
everyone becomes more Curious it becomes
the Habit that's the way you interact
with the world so I think it to a large
extent can be taught that's the that's
kind of the thing I I was reflecting on
is do you have to even tell someone to
look at the framework and then find
something better because I'm in search
of the person that looks at the
framework and goes Steve I found
something better
those people are amazing they are they
do exist they do exist and I found some
of them and that's that's Dave burkhoff
right no one said to him you have to
question whether the way everyone swims
the back stroke is the best way
uh and I found a few people like that
but they are vanishingly rare there
aren't that many of them who really make
that their kind of life's philosophy
experimentalism as a philosophy but
there are some a lot of them actually
end up going into Academia and into
science because they want to know they
want to know the answers yeah they just
want to know they're curious to the ends
of the Earth but
for the rest the other 99 of people who
aren't like that I think you can lift
them all up from a three out of ten four
out of ten to a seven or an eight maybe
not a nine or a ten
but if your whole Workforce is people
who are seven or an eight out of ten on
curiosity it's much better than having
the most theater three so I think you
can move the needle a little bit and
those that small minority tend to
provide so much value for the
less experimental majority yeah you know
like because I I think about we have
this group and all of my companies
called Ever Changing landscape and the
whole point of the group is when we see
something changing in the world or you
know might be a new update to a platform
or something within our industry has
changed it could be an update or a
feature or whatever
take it from where you've seen it and
just share it with the rest of the
company and you see in these groups that
we have that it's really a small cohort
educating everybody else so let's say
there's 100 people in the slack Channel
yeah I'd say there'd be
five people that were super prolific and
there'd be 15 that were kind of you know
yeah kind of doing it and then you know
then it'd be another 30 25 that do it
sometimes and then there's kind of a
solid 50 that don't ever do it and they
don't seem to have that sort of Natural
Curiosity I always think as a CEO I need
to like find more of that five percent
because the the disproportionate value
they can add by finding as I said to you
before recording this podcast just a
tiny tweak that changes our trajectory
is profound here's here's my advice on
that I think I think you're exactly
right about the distribution and we see
this in a lot of cases uh I talk in the
book about the 80 20 rule the Pareto
Principle that most of the gains come
from the small minority and so on and we
know that like if you're a business
often the vast majority of your sales
come from the tiny minority of customers
and so on so we know this is true
and in the Casio where you say 50 of
people are not doing the work on the
slack Channel
you could break that 50 down into I
think two broad groups there's one group
that's just
the way that kind of person approaches
life is to just not be very motivated
and there's nothing there's not much you
can do about that part right if they
come to work because they see it
entirely as an extrinsic
reward for their time that they come and
they get paid and that's just what
they're doing and it's a day job
you're never going to teach them to be
curious but there is a group of people
in that 50 and I I think it's probably
sizable especially at a company like one
of your companies
those people want to be better they want
to do a better job at this they maybe
don't have the skills today but if you
show them they will latch onto it and
they will get better at it and it's the
the most important thing you can do as a
as a leader in organizations is to not
just find the people who are talented
versus not talented but to find the
people who don't yet have whatever you
would consider to be the talent and to
separate them into those who really want
to be their talented ones and those who
just actually don't care that much
they're just there to do the bare
minimum
and that's where I think you're pouring
your your attention and education into
that that first set of people who are
motivated is key do you think you can
teach someone to be curious about
something because I wonder you know
people go home and they choose what they
watch on YouTube and what they read
about yeah and what they consume on
Netflix that kind of seems to be the
purest indication of what they're
actually curious about the stuff they
they dealt lean into in their free time
so we've got some people in our team
even here that are you know here now
that when they go home they're learning
about cameras and how to shoot video
video and all those kinds of things
um and then you might have someone in
the same team that goes home and just
wants to watch keeping up with
Kardashians you know it's soft it's
quite obvious I think everyone could
agree that the the first person who has
a Natural Curiosity towards the subject
matter outside of their professional
Pursuits is going to achieve more in
their professional Pursuits so could you
and you know I have to pref have to
provide some Nuance here that it doesn't
matter if someone goes home and watches
keeping up with Kardashians they'll be
useful in other ways because they'll be
getting sort of creative insights
outside of the industry like you said
but I do believe that those that are
curious about the thing they do
professionally will go the furthest yeah
so I think with curiosity in general if
you like if I I don't know much about
cameras I just have my phone and I use
it as a camera that's about all I know I
just push buttons
and so I'm not that curious about them
but if you give me
let's say the most educated camera
Consumer in the world is at 100 if you
take me from zero percent where I am now
to 10 or 15 percent
I then know enough to start to develop
curiosity part of the problem with being
a novice is you don't even know what's
interesting about the thing like if you
if you don't drink red wine
and then you at some point you start
drinking you're like oh there are
different varietals that's interesting
oh even within that varietal it turns
out there's a difference between Napa
and burgundy or whatever and as you get
more knowledgeable about the subject the
nuances become interesting to you
because they mean something like I I
this happens with music all the time
like if you love a kind of music
especially if it's the kind of music
that most people don't listen to
you try to show someone else that music
and you play your two favorite songs
they'll be like they both sound the same
it's the most frustrating thing as
someone who likes something a lot who's
really passionate and it's true for art
and movies and whatever else so
everyone's like yeah whatever it's like
it's same same it's all just part of the
genre
but once you develop a taste for it and
you get curious and you get into it
that's when you start to see the real
life of it and so I think you're the job
of someone who wants others to be
curious about a topic or to develop
Curiosities is to make them not the zero
percent to make them at the 10 or 15 or
20th percent that then prompts them to
want to figure out the rest
because you don't get there from zero
you talk about maximizing and
satisficing you believe there are two
outlooks on success this is part two of
your business um your book The the heart
section and it there seems to be some
kind of through line between
experimenters and non-experimenters and
maximizes and satisficing yeah
satisficing yeah that's right yeah so
this this idea it's an old idea it's
about 70 years old now but it's the idea
that um broadly speaking when you make
decisions or make choices you can be
either a maximizer on one end of the
spectrum or a satisficer a maximizer is
someone who says about everything I need
the very best I need to spend a lot of
time and energy figuring out the best I
need to produce the best if I'm choosing
what food to eat or what job to have or
whatever everything's got to be the very
very best I'm going to maximize I'm
going to make it as good as it can
possibly be and I'm going to bring the
resources required to make that happen
satisfices of people who say
you know there's a level that's good
enough it's not perfect but it gets over
the bar and it's going to be a different
bar for different things if it's an
important thing the bar gets raised and
it'll it's lowered for less important
things but as soon as I find an option
that's good enough I'm going to take it
and then move on with my life
and then there are people who are kind
of in the middle who say about some
things like my partner that I choose or
if I'm going to choose what job to have
or which which country to live in those
are really important whether to have
kids those are important questions I'm
going to maximize on those everything
else
not that important at least relatively
speaking I'm going to just find a good
enough option and what you find is that
people who satisfy us
tend to be much happier oh [__]
not at no the the key is to I mean if
you maximize on everything I think it's
paralyzing the key is to know when to
maximize and so if you satisfy us a lot
of the time and say let's be honest I
don't need to status to maximize on
everything
then then you're that's the way to do it
is to know to be able to distinguish
between the two so if you're a chronic
maximizer about absolutely everything
there's a lot of evidence that you're
likely to get stuck on small unimportant
things
depression is that um a trait of
maximizes yeah absolutely High achieving
yeah I mean so what what ends up
happening is it's the same as
perfectionism that's basically what it
is it's the it's the choice-based
version of perfectionism where you never
live up to your own standards which on
the one hand produces very good things
because you're always looking upward and
trying to get better on the other hand
it's paralyzing and exhausting and to
live your entire life that way in every
aspect of your life is problematic Mo
gauna who came on this podcast talked
about how we're happy when our
expectations are met and we're unhappy
when our expectations are unmet and from
what I ascertained from what you said
there maximizers have such high
expectations that they're often unmet
which causes unhappiness yeah accurate
100 yeah that's exactly right my thesis
my um PhD thesis was on expectations and
on on how important it is when
expectations deviate from or when when
reality deviates from expectations it's
almost never about the objective thing
you know like two people could have
exactly the same thing and feel totally
happy one could feel totally happy with
it the other could be devastated by it
it's all about what you're used to what
you expect how high your standards are
so I I think that's that's a very
powerful human element in in these
calculations when you're talking about
experimenters these are people that go
in search of nuances and ask why our
experimenters typically maximizes
because on the other side of the coin
satisfices
um they kind of accept it so they might
be the people that would accept
convention conventions answer for as
being yeah I'll just do what has always
been done yeah I think so I think
there's some overlap but the thing about
the people that I found were
experimentalists constantly asking
questions it was rarely about trivial
things it's not like they went and said
I'm going to go to the supermarket today
and get a chocolate and I want to
experiment I want to I want to eat every
chocolate in the supermarket over the
next year so that I know for the future
which one's the best they don't do that
they say hey I'm a swimmer I want to be
an Olympian how do I get to be an
Olympian I'm going to maximize the hell
out of that and so it's it's about
finding something that's really
important to you where it's worth being
an experimentalist but it would be
paralyzing to do that with every aspect
of your life I I think it certainly
wouldn't work for me
life crises
um we're talking about age a second ago
and I've got a I've got two friends I've
got one friend that's 29 and another
friend that's 39 and they're going
through what appears to be on the
surface of Crisis yeah and when I read
your book about how you call it the nine
ending crisis yeah it all made sense
what is that yeah so
this this is some research with a
colleague of mine Heller hirschfield
who's also a very good friend at UCLA
and when we were he was at NYU at the
time we we went we were sitting in his
office and I said to him you know
um I ran a marathon when I was 29. I've
never run another one I but I ran one at
29 and I remember thinking
I have to show myself as I approach 30
that there's meaning to my life and
purpose I need a big goal I need to
train for something and I thought that
was a really interesting human instinct
like it was a very productive one I ran
a marathon which was not a bad thing but
we were talking about and he said to me
it seems like maybe at these ages where
there's a nine at the end of your age
and you're looking down the Specter of a
new decade that it pushes you to kind of
audit your life you ask yourself is my
life meaningful is it what I want it to
be are there gaps that I need to fill is
there something I need to do and so we
started to find these big data sets that
had some evidence where we could see
what ages people were at and looking at
their decisions and we found all sorts
of really interesting behaviors when
people were 29 39 49 59 you get this big
rise in Marathon running so I wasn't the
only one there's an over-representation
of marathon runners especially
first-time marathon runners who have a
nine at the end of their age if you were
already a marathon runner you run your
fastest marathons in general when you
have a nine at the end of your age
um there's also some stuff that's not so
good so you see a massive rise in
infidelity so we found evidence that
there's an over-representation of people
at those ages who are seeking out
extramarital Affairs you even see a rise
in suicide
so that doesn't mean everyone who's got
a nine end at their a nine uh ending age
is at risk of that but it shows in
general that we we sort of hunt for
meaning and so the midlife crisis idea
that maybe when you approach 40 there's
going to be a big crisis there that may
be true but we also found this kind of
cyclical decade every decade you get
this this sort of miniature nine ending
crisis
I was the in the best shape I've ever
been in my life when I was 29. that was
the year that was the year I got closest
to having all eight ABS 30 has it been
great not as great
so I was wondering as you said that if
uh what happens when
the year after you know if 29 is often
some of our most productive achievements
or Affairs yeah does that means 30 40 50
is when we we chill a little bit it
varies a little it's funny so what you
see is it's sort of like a wave and the
peak of the wave is at nine but there
are some people who it only Dawns on
them when they actually hit the zero
ending age some people it starts at the
eight ending age it's really when you
get to like
34 35 36 44 45 46 right in the middle of
the decade when you see the the trough
for all of these kinds of behaviors
we're sort of most in our lives and
doing our thing and not really
questioning as much which I mean we
found that fascinating that that just
the accident that we happened to count
using a base 10 system means that every
10 years we we Zoom back and ordered our
lives in this way
it's such an intro because it doesn't
the number is such a an irrelevant thing
in the context of your physiological
Health your metabolic Health but symbols
symbols matter and you talk about
symbols in your first book as well yeah
and we don't appreciate how much symbols
sway our life in fundamental ways do we
yeah no that's right that's true and and
I think you know even these numbers are
symbolic they have symbolic meaning for
us it's something when you say I'm in my
30s it's different from saying I'm 28 or
29. even if it's just a year apart or
even a few days apart and it's the same
with what it means to be in your 40s
it's symbolic for a time of life and and
certain expectations about what that
time of your life is supposed to be and
so I think that's what happens we talked
about expectations that you you're
suddenly in your 40s or your 50s or your
60s and then you say what does that mean
and where here is where my expectations
are I should have the following things
maybe a certain amount of money a
certain career status maybe a partner
maybe kids
and then do you have those things and if
you don't
then you get this kind of acting out
Behavior some of it productive that
tries to remedy the problem perhaps you
try to get fit and run a marathon but
sometimes for some people it's not very
productive Behavior I know this more
than most because I started in business
at 18 and you can imagine
um when I was on BBC News night
and they introduce you and he's only 18
years old my business is making zero
money yeah but they were just blown away
because of expectation of what an 18
year old should be doing and then I had
that throughout my career and he's only
25 and he's got a thousand and he's only
20 and then he's only 29
and then it's stuff Stephen is an
entrepreneur
and I'm like listen one day has changed
and suddenly no one's Introducing Me by
my age he was 29 and 30. the
expectations of a 29 year old running a
business and how big that business might
be and how many team members and revenue
versus the 30 year olds you go huh you
better be a billionaire or else we're
not going to mention his age I'm in my
early 40s and it's the same thing as an
academic you know if you're a professor
in your 30s that's you're young and then
you hit suddenly one day you're 40 and
they're like ah yeah you're a professor
whatever
when you wrote about symbols in your
first book what were some of the most
sort of surprising things in terms of
how powerful and inspirational they are
with us to us without us even knowing uh
well you know as a marketing Professor
I'm very very interested in how symbols
play a role in branding and in conveying
ideas really succinctly I think that the
the simplest way to convey an idea is
with an image and the images that are
the most powerful are often in symbolic
form a lot of them are very negative
images that we get from symbols they're
associated with ideals that we don't
like for example
um you know like uh something like a
swast sticker is a it's a terrible
symbol the way it's used or has been
used for the last almost 100 years now
um but the amount of meaning that's
conveyed in those symbols is is
tremendous
um and so it's
there's a there's a sort of terrible
power to symbols they can shape behavior
in all sorts of ways one of the studies
I did
um looked at people who were religious
versus not religious and then showed
them a religious symbol and then asked
them to do a behavior that was either
going to be done honestly or dishonestly
we were essentially measuring whether
they were going to behave honestly and
for those religious people seeing that
symbol kind of clicked something for
them and they became much more honest
so in general they might have had an
honesty level of 50 but you show them
that symbol even subtly in the
environment around them and suddenly
they become much more honest so these
these things are constantly swimming
around us and and gently nudging our
behavior in different directions
it almost reminded me a little bit of
the um the thing you wrote about in that
book about how when people are shown a
picture of eyeballs at like a free snack
bar where they can take what they want
they're much more honest about their
decisions because eyes again in a way
are a symbol yeah they're a symbol of
the tribe maybe yeah of being watched of
feeling like you're being watched I
there's um there's some really
interesting evidence from this uh
looking at um using eyeballs to get
people to behave better so if you have
an image of a pair of eyes looking at
you just disembodied just the eyes you
don't see any of the rest of the face
you find that people behave much more
honestly they're much less likely to
steal something you see shoplifting
rates go down the the best use of it
though I think is
if you say you're a chocoholic you love
chocolate but you don't want to be
eating it but you also want to have a
little bit around every now and again
one thing you can do is you can have a
little cupboard in your in your kitchen
where the inside of the cupboard you put
a mirror and that's where the chocolate
lives so you open it up and every time
you reach for the chocolate you have to
stare into your own soul
and so the eyeballs whether they're
yours or somebody else's just just
having to look at yourself not just
metaphorically but literally as you do
something it brings out your better
angels and there's a lot of evidence for
that in in various psychological studies
one of the things that stands in the way
of acceptance is this question which a
lot of people ask when they get stuck
which is or when they have a life Quake
which is why me why did this happen to
me yeah and that
relinquishes our sense of personal
responsibility it makes us a victim to
to the situation
um which we might objectively be a
victim however you want to Define it to
a situation but it doesn't seem to be
conducive with um getting out of it no
it doesn't and you know the interesting
thing is if you go to people who are at
the end of their lives they're on their
Death Beds and they know that the end is
near and you say to them did you ever
have a why me situation did it did
something happen in your life at any
point where you had cause whether you
did or not you had cause to say why me
you know this felt unfair
hundred percent of them will say yes
that's another case where we feel
isolated in those moments we're like why
me the implication of that is it's me
but not someone else their turn will
come we will all have these moments that
are really hard to deal with some of us
have had them already some of us will
have more of them in the future but they
are Universal and so the the best thing
you can do I think in those moments is
to just kind of recognize that it's okay
to be sad and pissed off and to struggle
with them but also there's some comfort
in knowing that actually this is just
what it is to be human everyone has
these moments you're not unique in
responding that way and you're not
unique in experi in experiencing that
situation in the first place it's
privileged as well as you write about in
your book it's a privileged response to
have yeah that you don't see across
other cultures as readily yeah it's
privilege and it also I think reflects
the sense of agency we've got from
becoming essentially masters of our
worlds in ways that were not true for
most of human history you know we
as science and medicine goes we're
living longer we're generally a stronger
species we can do a lot of incredible
things we can move spacecraft to other
planets you know it's it's ridiculous
the number of things we can do
and so as a result of that we kind of
assume that that's the kind of control
we should have over every aspect of Our
Lives if we can do big things that are
amazing why can't we do small things
that are amazing and uh that's not the
way the world works and we mistake that
General sense of human control over the
world especially as we move away from
religion and become more more secular
we develop that sense of privilege and I
think cultures that that don't have that
to the same extent or that's still Hue
to religion more strongly you have much
more of a recognition that hey to some
extent I'm kind of at the mercy of
whether it's the gods or however you
want to describe it and that makes you
more open to the idea that you don't
have control is that less westernized
culture so cultures with less money yes
that's what that's why the privileged
aspect comes into it because I think the
West
where we are more
expectations again isn't it it comes
back to almost everything yeah it's a
huge huge part of The Human Experience
we all need to lower our expectations or
have realistic ones yeah yeah
there's going to be so many people that
are listening that are that realize that
you know they objectively realize that
life comes in seasons
and but the the difficulty comes is when
one of those Seasons ends yeah and we
kind of resist the ending and a lot of
people I think will feel stuck when a
seasonal chapter of life one of those
life Quakes you know I guess the start
of a life quick I guess is one when one
of those Seasons ends knowing from a
intellectual from a strategy standpoint
how to deal with it in that moment
because when a season of life ends
there's so much uncertainty and fear and
you you can't always see the season to
come
um and that's where a lot of those
feelings come from he talked about
acceptance being a key
um path forward but is there anything
else I really want to make sure we've
completed that is there anything else
that we can do to ex to be better at
transitioning from one season of life to
the other yeah I so I love this
philosophy from uh the the rock musician
Jeff Tweedy the front man of the band
Wilco who's also a writer he writes he
does music he's a renaissance man
um he talks about that feeling of being
stuck and and sometimes it's in
transitions but also it's it's when
you're chronically being forced to come
up with new ideas if you're a creative
and I think this applies to to
Transitions to new periods as well he
talks about this idea that you know for
decades he has had to wake up and his
bread and butter is to come up with
creative songs and to write good
passages that will then become part of a
book
that is asking a lot of people but what
he does is he recognizes that Above All
Else
action is going to move him forward when
you feel stuck action even if it's
slightly sideways it may not be exactly
where you want to go but the mere fact
that you're acting gives you feedback
that you're not stuck that you're moving
in the right direction
and so he talks about Lo at least
temporarily lowering your expectations
to the ground and so he talks about
pouring out the bad ideas if he's
writing a song he'll say what's the
worst musical phrase I could write right
now or what's the worst line for this
book let me come up with three of the
worst lines ever and that's easy to do
because you have no expectations it's
not maximizing or satisficing it's just
like the bare minimum
and when you do that
you get the ball rolling you show
yourself that you're not stuck and so
then what follows that as he describes
it is the good stuff that's when you get
your good ideas because the you you know
the wheels are being greased and you're
moving forward and I think that's true
in transition periods that we spend a
lot of time agonizing there's a lot of
dealing with the emotions which is fair
there's a lot of time strategizing
but just acting is tremendously
liberating even if the action itself
doesn't bring measurable rewards in the
short term I was thinking as you're
saying that the con within the context
of dating so you've just come out of a
horrific divorce you're sat at home on
your own you can't even remember how to
date yeah and you're going to try and
find someone that is as appealing as the
the person that's just dumped you or
divorced you and they're hard to find so
you just procrastinate you kind of sit
in the misery and that's where you feel
stuck yeah if I apply the philosophy
you've just said to bad ideas first what
I'd actually do is I'd just go on a date
yeah and I'd say listen this is not
going to be the husband but we're going
to start getting some practice and we're
going to start getting out there and
putting my makeup back on and whatever
and getting out there into the market
and you take you take a bad date just to
get the ball rolling it's accurate yeah
I mean a lot of people do that that's
that's the philosophy of the rebound
right that uh oh yeah yeah but but I
think that's right I mean I think from
the perspective of the person who's been
dumped the re we always think about the
rebound from the perspective of the
person who suddenly discovers they're
the next the next option yeah yeah you
know that's not a good sign yeah
but if you are the person who's trying
to get back out there I think that's a
really great thing to do and it doesn't
have to be a romantic date it's just
like go do something you know you're
gonna you'll wallow for a little bit
which is fine
but the best thing you can do is to as I
said move sideways moving forwards might
be going on more dates to try and find
the next person it's not time for that
yet it's time to just go and go to a
movie go and see a rock band like do
whatever it is you like doing just so
you're not doing nothing just act and
action one of the great things it does
especially when you're you're ruminating
and you're thinking about how bad and
tough things are is action is a
phenomenal distraction like when you're
acting you're not thinking as much and
so it's it's worth doing just to be
doing something that's why people
rebound isn't it but it also gives us a
sense of meaning and purpose which is
often the thing that the rejection has
robbed us of so me going out and having
a one-night stand don't no I don't
advise it I don't I'm not against it but
I don't advise you I have no opinion on
one night stands
um going out and getting having a
one-night stand maybe there is the
reason I feel rejection is because I'm
telling myself a story that I'm
unlovable or unwanted and going out and
getting evidence that someone is
interested in me can help with the the
pain of the rejection and it's the same
within work if you've been fired from a
job yeah maybe you're telling yourself a
story about your you know your
self-worth and just going out there and
doing some work
even if it's volunteering somewhere
could be
help ease the rejection because the
rejection often is just a story isn't it
yeah I mean I think that's right I also
think The Human Experience is
essentially bouncing like a ping pong
ball
from one thing to the next where the
next thing you do is trying to capture
whatever feels like it's missing from
the last thing and actually a lot of
relationships when people jump from
relationship to relationship are about
exactly that it's like when you when in
a relationship ends you think about what
was the thing that was missing in that
one like Why didn't it work and you
fixate on that with the next person now
there may have been some great things
about the last person you forget to
focus on retaining those in the next
person and so then you're missing
something different in the next person
that you go to after that and so this is
what we do in jobs this is what we do in
how we spend our time in Pursuits in
um in dating we're constantly trying to
create a thing that feels like it's
missing because humans by Nature just
focus on deficits on losses on the
negatives and so that sort of propels us
forward what's the better approach
um I mean you know the explicit one is
the sort of gratitude approach in saying
what's working like that's the flip side
of this is to say whether it's about a
relationship or a job what were the best
five things about that relationship that
I would want to retain in future if you
don't ask yourself that question
it biases the decisions you make
thereafter and I think it biases them in
a way that's really unproductive it's
going to be true if you jump to a new
job move to a new country or city or
town any change it's worth asking what
do I not only what didn't work and do I
want to fix but also what did work and
do I want to retain
the best way to get unstuck is to
simplify the problem as much as possible
that way you can identify what the
sticking points are I call this
simplifying of the complex a friction
audit what did you mean by that
yeah so over the years I've I've met
people who
need much less time to make sense of
complicated situations knowing what's
not important it's good to know what's
important but I think a lot of us can do
that what's really hard is being able to
say
subtract that subtract that subtract
that this is the thing this is the
Nugget the kernel this is what I should
be focusing on and so that's that's the
idea of of kind of the importance of
subtracting
and there's a great book called subtract
by Lighty clots that's on this exact
topic the friction audit itself
is a sort of philosophical version of
that idea where in business in
particular I do a lot of business
Consulting that works on on this this
friction audit process and I spent a
long time with companies that ask the
question how do we how do we sweeten the
deal you know how do we make the product
better more attractive how do we stand
above the crowd
and I started to realize that the return
on investment to doing that is often
minimal and it's expensive to do that
and it's really hard to do that in a
competitive marketplace where everyone's
doing the same thing
but where you get your massive return is
not by focusing on making the carrot
more attractive it's by removing the
stick that stops people from doing what
you'd like them to do maybe it's
interacting with a customer service rep
maybe it's buying maybe it's making a
particular choice maybe it's
understanding information whatever it is
if you weed those out you sand them down
so there's no longer friction there you
see tremendous rises in conversion often
for almost no cost it's just a matter of
asking that particular frame of question
and going through that friction audit
process and that friction audit process
I guess it starts with that question
which is like what's getting in the way
yeah you can ask yourself that you can
ask your team that question yeah we
probably don't ask ask our teams that
question enough just generally in
business which is because we're always
thinking about you know things we can
add Maybe
um something we can buy yeah equipment
we could buy someone we could hire
yeah I mean I when I think about this
certainly for teams it works really well
I also think for individual lives
everyone if you ask them this is really
liberating I like to do this sometimes
what are the three things in your life
right now that cause you the most
friction it could be interactions with a
certain person it could be commuting if
you if you're traveling a lot it
everyone's got a different answer to the
question
but imagine that those three things you
could just eradicate from your life
right now how much better would your
life be and people often say like wait
like a hundred percent better it'd be my
life would be double as good as it is
now and so the next thing is to say well
that's a massive return on investment if
you can't eradicate them that's fine but
at least sand them down minimize them
shrink them to the extent possible
that's where you should devote your
resources so really really powerful
intervention for individual lives but I
think also as you said in the workplace
as well such a good habit to have asking
that question frequently not just to
yourself but also just to the people you
work with yes because you get such
surprising answers when you ask these
questions also to to your partner or to
your friend your close friends there's
nothing better than being asked that
question if someone asks you that the
the degree of caring if if they actually
seem like they want to be able to help
that will melt any barriers between you
and another person if you if you
genuinely say what are the three things
right now that feel like they're the
hardest most unpleasant things and how
can I help you you fix them is a
tremendously
uplifting connecting experience
it made me reflect as you're saying that
on that is it the 61 rule in aviation
have you heard that uh yeah I think I
know what you mean where if you're one
degree off for every x amount of miles
you travel yeah you'll miss the airport
by
60 miles or something like that yeah so
just one degree in deviation from the
path which could be anything that's
causing friction in your relationship at
work and whatever you're doing means
that you'll miss the airport by 60 miles
for every 100 miles you travel or
something like that yeah and it kind of
shows how one small unaddressed friction
point in your life could make you miss
miss the Target in such a significant
way and by checking in by doing the
friction audit frequently hopefully we
can make sure we we stay on course in
our lives I think about that a lot with
my relationship because quite honestly
if I'm if I'm away on business or I'm
just getting caught up in my life and I
don't
do a bit of a friction order in our
relationship
you know you get a couple of weeks in
and I look over at her in the kitchen
and something's wrong yeah I don't know
what's wrong
but something's wrong and it's always
because I haven't done we haven't had
like a conversation in a while about
like something yeah we haven't checked
in yeah I think it's it's huge I
actually talk about this in the book
that 61 idea
um oh so you know what it is because I
like I like destroyed it there no no no
no no no so I don't talk about it as the
61 but I talk about the the Y2K bug that
people were worried about around the
turn of the century to 2000 there was
this concern that all these computers
would crash because they all had the
two-digit uh number associated with the
year so in 1999 it said 99 but when we
ticked over to 2000 it went zero zero
and a lot of computers would think it
was 1900 instead of two thousand this
was a concern that planes would fall out
of the sky and nuclear power plants
would explode and all this
but they first identified this problem
in the in the 60s it was a guy at IBM
named Bob bema
and I think it's bemer or bema
who um who was like hey we should figure
this out like it's not a big deal yet
but I think computers are going to be
big they're going to be a lot of them
around by the year 2000. let's deal with
this in the 60s where it's easy to re
reprogram the few computers we have
let's make it a four digit number or do
whatever we need to do in the end
governments in the 90s spent billions of
dollars because that one degree off in
1960 that no one bothered to correct
ended up being the 60
by the time we got to the year 2000 so
these these little things that niggle
that we don't deal with end up getting
worse and worse and worse and it's so
true about relationships they compound
negatively against us the first my
favorite book I ever read when I started
reading more was I think it's I think
it's called Jeff Olson the slight Edge
he talks exactly about that how about
the things that are easy not to do
like
saving five pounds or brushing your
teeth
um other things that end up compounding
against us all for us in our lives and
having the most significant impact
um because we ignore those things we
don't think they're important yeah um
and that's why I think of friction order
it's not it's not
a waste of time it's often sweating the
smallest things that Garners the biggest
results yeah as you know they're a
sponsor of the podcast and I'm one of
the investors in the company my
relationship with Hill started with the
ready to drink range which I have here
in front of me on the table why did I
choose to drink this
first and foremost convenience I'm not
the type of person that wants to spend a
huge amount of time whisking or mixing
things together and I don't typically
have a huge amount of time during the
day and there are some days not always
but there are some days where because of
the limited amount of time I have the
choices that I would ordinarily reach
for aren't necessarily the most healthy
choices they're certainly not
nutritionally complete so as soon as I
discovered who all existed because of a
wonderful guy who worked one of my teams
in Manchester walked past me wearing a
heel t-shirt I inquired what it was he
told me what it was and then I bought
the ready to drink bottles into the
office it was a game changer for me and
it meant that on those days where I'm
tempted to reach for Less nutritionally
complete options or less healthy food
options I have something right
underneath my desk in the fridge that I
can reach for that allows me to remain
in line with my health and nutrition
goals and Tesco have now increased their
listings with hewell so you can now get
the RTD ready to drink in Tesco
expresses all across the UK
career hot streaks yeah this I I Love
This research these these researchers
were asking this question is there
something if we look at the course of
thousands of careers in different areas
creatives business people and so on
scientists
can you predict when we're going to have
the best periods in our careers that's
basically what they're asking they call
this a hot streak you know like when you
if you're an academic and you publish
your five most high impact papers or if
you're a filmmaker and you have five
films that are seen as your Canon when
is that going to happen can we predict
that is there a way to manufacture that
if I'm a filmmaker or a scientist and
they they identify these two processes
that need to happen in precisely this
order
one of them is is known as exploration
and in Exploration you go far and wide
you basically you have a default of yes
which means that when someone comes to
you with an opportunity you're like yeah
sure why not I give a talk to freshmen
at NYU and they should as freshmen that
time in your life you should be an
Explorer you don't know what you're
going to end up doing with your life you
could stumble on something wonderful you
should say yes to everything and uh
during this phase you know they they
talk about Jackson Pollock the artist
who ended up developing his drip
technique that he became famous for
before he did that he spent a number of
years trying five or six different other
techniques Peter Jackson who made the
Lord of the Rings and Hobbit films and
became you know a Titan for those films
he was doing horror and all sorts of
other stuff before that these were their
exploratory periods
but at some point that yes default has
to become a no default where you say hey
I've been trying these different things
I've been exploring it's time to exploit
that's the second phase and during that
phase you say
hey of those five or six things I was
exploring this one looks like it has the
most promise
I'm going to pour my heart and soul into
that thing for a little while and see
what comes of it so for Jackson Pollock
it was the drip painting for Peter
Jackson it's these big Epic Fantasy
films
and what happens then is you've
considered the options you pick the best
one and then you make them Absolute most
you can make of it you squeeze all the
juice out of the orange
and that's when those successful hot
Street periods arise when you go Broad
and then you go really narrow and then
when you feel stuck again you go broad
again and then you go narrow and you
expand and you contract throughout your
life professionally and I think
personally as well that's that's I think
a path to a good life
so people that might have been doing the
same thing for
a couple of decades or a decade I'm
probably not gonna stumble across a
career hot streak because they're
missing that experimentation and that
exploration yeah I think that's right
and you know the best evidence for this
for me at least personally was
um when I give this talk to the Freshman
I show them the four emails that I've
got in the last 20 years that changed my
life and my instinct I actually show
them I redact some of the information
but I show them the images of these
emails that arrived in my inbox and I
remember with each one when they arrived
I was like I'm so busy I there's no way
I can do this it would be an email from
someone saying for example before I
wrote my first book an agent reached out
and said I just read a piece about some
of your research I think there might be
a book in this what do you think my
first my first instinct was like
I don't have time for this I I'm so busy
I'm a first year professor
but I was in this exploratory period so
I ended up saying yes totally changed my
professional life I have a few others
that are like that and those four are
sitting in a pool with thousands that
went nowhere but if you don't have that
yes default for a certain period of time
you're never going to find those four
gold nuggets in that that otherwise kind
of silty mess and so I think it's a
really important default to have at
certain times in your life we talked
before we started recording about some
of the subjects that you love talking
about and creativity was one of them
when we think about creativity a lot of
people think about this the process of
coming up with a new idea and
um by trial and error I've tried to
figure out the conditions which allow me
to come up with my best ideas what I've
I mean I've got a couple of hypotheses
around when I'm you know when I'm at the
gym I seem to come up with all my best
ideas or
um when I have
space yeah but the process of coming up
with an idea if I was to if you were
advising me as a consultant on how to
get my teams to think of better ideas or
to come up with our best ideas what
would you what would you advise us to do
yeah so here's a long-term strategy that
I think is really valuable that I've
used and I've found very helpful I have
several documents
that are about 20 years old one of them
is called research ideas
one is called book ideas one is called
teaching ideas
and every time I see anything that's
even remotely interesting to me that's
related to one of those I put it in one
of those documents depending on what it
is like for teaching ideas it'll be a
great ad campaign that I want to share
with my students if you do that for 20
years that document gets really really
long and so my documents now those are
some of them are I think like 40 or 50
pages long just line after line of links
and ideas and short descriptions of
things that I've come across that are
useful if I go back to that it does two
things one thing is it shows me over
time what I'm interested in because
sometimes it's hard in the moment to say
I don't know what am I generally
interested in but I have a 20-year
record of what I'm interested in the
other thing it does is it allows you to
do what I think of as the best the
single best reproducible process for
coming up with creative ideas which is
called recombination
so I have this illusion that the best
ideas are radically original that they
stand on their own they're different
from anything that came before they are
Paradigm shifts Everything Changes but
even when you when you look at those
ideas that seem that way and you
interrogate them and you trace them back
far enough they are almost always a
combination of old ideas or a
recombination so the the best example of
this that I came across and I talk about
this in the book is um when you ask
musicians who is the most original
musician of the 20th century one of the
most common responses is Bob Dylan
but if you look deeply
Dylan certainly had a lot of elements
that seemed like they were different
from what other people were doing but he
himself has said oh yeah I was borrowing
from this tradition and that tradition
and the folk tradition and this artist
and that artist and then when you look
at the DNA of his music there's so much
evidence for what came before it's true
in business ideas as well one of the
things I asked my students to do
is um come up with a radically original
idea in business that you've seen tell
me about a company that's doing
something radically original and then
I'll say they'll come up with something
and then I'll say all right tell me what
is similar to that that came before it
and they can always come up with
something
so is it radically original or is it
just a new combination of elements that
existed before and I think that
if you have this long document randomly
pick idea three and idea 12 and see if
you can combine them and there you might
have a business or an idea that's useful
we could also do that collectively I
guess as a as a team and as a company we
can create a an internal ideas document
which everyone can kind of contribute to
in terms of if we're thinking you know
ways to make
ways to make this podcast or one of my
businesses more successful just dumping
in ideas that we're kind of on the
someday shelf yeah um
when we revisit that document in the
future we can go okay so we were trying
to find a way to get
listeners to share the podcast more and
oh someone found a tool over here that
does something else for this part of the
building maybe we could combine these
two things and use that to share the
podcast more here's a tweak to that I
think that's a great idea but if you
make it a collected document people are
going to feel like the ideas have to be
a certain level of goodness to share
them okay so start alone everyone has
their own document and then you combine
it at some point ah nice that's much
better for in general that idea of
brainstorming is the first step great if
you do it on your own you never want to
start by thinking in a group group is
going to start alone yeah people
converge they're scared yeah all of
those things do you do much of that do
you do much of um sort of corporate
Consulting yeah
quite a lot what typically tends to be
the symptoms or the challenge that
corporations are typically stuck with
yeah so I mean not all the Consulting I
do is about being stuck specifically but
that's often a way of framing why you
would get a consultant in right there's
something you want to change and you
want to fix it so you very very often
it's a company that's experienced a
change in situation like the cost of our
raw materials has gone up what do we do
now or there's a thing that we needed
and we can't get that anymore or the
legislation has changed and the
government now doesn't let us do this
key part of what we used to do so a lot
of it ends up being quite operational
when it's about stuckness it's like how
do we pivot how do we figure out a way
around this situation
um
but the the Consulting briefs are
incredibly Broad and Vary which is again
why I love it so much because no two
gigs is the same pivoting then yeah
there's a lot of pivoting and a lot of
figuring out how to change and also what
what doesn't need to change I think
often the instinct is
yeah I did some work with a company that
makes denim jeans and they were like
well Cotton's just gone up dramatically
in price and so as a result it's more
expensive to make our genes what do we
do and
they're like we need to just overhaul
the whole process I was like I don't
know I don't think you do I think what
you need to do is frame the rise in
price in a way that people don't bulk
and run away you know you've got a long
strong strong relationship with a lot of
customers over time you have a strong
brand identity and so on
so no don't throw the baby out with the
bath water let's just figure out how we
can sell the idea that maybe things are
just a bit more expensive now and and
against a backdrop where everything's
more expensive now so often it's about
minimizing change as it relates to these
hundred hundred ways to get unstuck do
you have any
any that are your your favorite all that
people are seemed to be most receptive
to that are maybe more on the original
side of things some of them are very
narrow and specific like case studies
that I talk about but a lot of them are
sort of Concepts like the idea that when
things get hard that's when creativity
begins like you've got to let things get
hard and we're not creative until we
struggle is is really important it's
very liberating because the what it does
is it takes the naive theory of what it
is to struggle to be creative it turns
it on its head and says hey you're going
in exactly the right direction it's the
hardship that Heralds the good stuff so
if it's not hard yet that's the problem
you've got to keep going until it gets
there
um and I a lot of people find that quite
liberating I've been playing around in
the notes of my phone with this idea I
was trying to find a way to put up my
stories over the last two days and like
I'd got to this point about how the the
Rarity of the amount of people that
overcome the challenge is a directly
correlates to the Rarity of the rewards
behind the door so when you when
something is sorry the level of
difficulty is a signal of how many
people gave up at that exact moment yeah
and then logically if you pursue and
overcome the difficulty you'll get
through that door
fewer people got the rewards behind that
door and you're seeing a very very
similar thing yeah you're right it helps
you reframe what difficulty is
difficulty isn't a a signal to to turn
back it's a signal that if you keep
going the rewards just got greater yeah
and I also think it's a question of how
difficult is this for other people right
so being creative is hard it's it's hard
for everyone even really good good
creatives are they get to a point where
it's kind of gets gets difficult because
you're trying to come up with something
out of whole cloth that's new yeah and
so that's not easy for anyone yeah if
there's something that most people can
do really easily and you're struggling
with it that's very different from doing
something that's hard and persevering
through that hardship so I think it's
always important to ask in the
background
am I
by finding this hard is that just like
part of the course of doing this thing
or am I finding it hard because I should
be putting my mind and attention
elsewhere maybe I'm just not very good
at this thing and I would be better at
spending my time doing something else
is there anything else in your work
because you're you're such a
multi-faceted guy you mean you've
written about a variety of different
subject Matters from
how screens are
um harming us and our addiction to these
mobile devices to um your first book
which sounds a lot on
sort of cognitive biases and psychology
and then this book about getting unstuck
in all the psychology around that is
there anything else that
we we should have talked about that you
think is valuable to my audience my
audience or a group of people that are
trying to get better in their lives
they're trying to get unstuck trying to
get close to their potential yeah
I'll say one thing I've been doing a lot
of research lately on on Nostalgia on
the concept of nostalgia
um I I think in many ways it's the most
powerful backward facing emotion we have
that as you get older you you start to
miss things that are no longer existing
in your life that you loved at the time
and that you think back on really fondly
and sometimes you even misremember them
and you think of them as better than
they actually were at the time but it's
an incredibly powerful emotion and um
one of the things we've been finding in
this research is that the things that
make you nostalgic are often at the time
what you think of as kind of mundane
routines like I I really miss grad
school I went to Princeton and loved it
and had a great five years there but I
don't miss the like momentous events I
don't miss graduation I don't miss
ceremonies I don't miss these big
culminations I miss the really mundane
stuff I miss walking this one path that
I used to take in the summer between my
dorm room and the office and I did it
hundreds of times if I could just do
that walk one more time and so I think
there's a kind of message there that we
often mistake
these momentous things that we go
through for being like what life is
really about but actually a lot of it is
the kind of mundane routine stuff that's
every day and the reason I like that
idea so much is because it suggests that
um you can ring tremendous value out of
things that might seem
trivial or not that important if you
recognize that like it's changed the way
I live my life I cultivate so many
little routines out of every day because
I know when I look back that's the stuff
that's going to really
feel full of reward and meaning I think
we try too hard sometimes to make
everything bigger and better and more
kind of emotionally explosive and so
that's uh I've always found that at
least since discovering that it's been a
really powerful idea for me
I think about that you just think about
Nostalgia relationships I've had
companies we've been in and you know
worked in for many many years and you
look back at the the early days you go I
wish we could have that again but it's
but you can't I can't quite easily put
my finger on exactly what what it was
other than
of excitement yeah you know a couple of
moments where I have flashbacks of good
moments we had but there's nothing to
say we can't create those little good
moments of celebrating together in a bar
yeah now and I mean there are three
components to well-being there's
anticipation before something happens
there's momentary when it's happening
and then there's retrospection after
it's happened think about a trip you
take if you're really excited for a trip
I'm going to Europe this summer and I'm
very excited about it a particular trip
that I'm going to be taking and I think
our job as humans in sort of respect of
all the time and energy we put into
living Our Lives is try to maximize
across those three kinds of well-being
the sum of those three
so the fun stuff book it in as early as
possible so you start enjoying it today
before it's happened and then in the
moment which tends to be very brief
right the moments themselves are brief
most of the value comes in thinking back
for the hopefully decades that come
afterwards so you're saying get your
phones out yeah yeah exactly just spend
every minute on your phone take a photo
of everything yeah spend the whole time
at Coachella just videoing just videoing
it you don't actually want to experience
it you just want to look back on it yeah
it's fantastic advice thank you Adam so
much for your time we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question
who they're going to be leaving it for
I don't get to see it until I open the
book
foreign
that's been left for you is
what is one belief or behavior that has
positively impacted your life in the
past 12 months
so I've spent a lot of time over the
last few years critiquing Tech and
that's what a lot of my work has been
about because I think it's
it's technology generally and Screen
based Tech we spend a lot of our time on
it and I don't think it always brings us
the rewards we'd hope
um and my instinct when I first
discovered generative AI chat GPT and
and the other models that are
proliferating
was similar with sort of this this
negativity it's going to steal jobs it's
going to be problematic
um but I I sort of adopted a more
experimental mindset and I've started
using it more and I've started using it
more than anything as a kind of
brainstorming partner it's like instead
of having a Brain Trust of 10 very smart
friends who all think a bit differently
about something chat GPT is like
billions of people all thinking
differently about things and you can
keep asking it hey give me another idea
give me another idea imagine that one's
wrong let's tweak that so I think what's
changed for me is
um I am trying to embrace these external
things that are changing around us a
little bit more because my natural
instinct is to say let's preserve what's
so special about being humans and try to
Stave off all of that infringing effect
that comes from uh from from these
changes but I
I'm finding that very rewarding because
I'm finding the good I can still say no
to the bad but I'm finding a lot of good
I think there's a bit of a hangover
from the social media era yeah and how
that played out where there was this new
technology we all rushed into it
thinking it was
um all positive and as the experiment
played out we realized that there were
there are unintended consequences yeah
so I think we've come into this real
next technological shift with the
unintended consequences mindset
I think that's right I think that's
exactly right and and I think the the
pendulum shifts I remember when I was
was uh talking to people about the last
book irresistible about screens and a
lot of them were like this is 2013-14
they were saying things like but
everyone loves Tech like why would we
even consider the problems why would you
write a book about that it's a storm and
a teacup the idea that people would were
not criticizing Tech 10 years ago in the
way they are now especially screen Tech
surprises a lot of people but I had way
more pushback early on
and then in the the say three or four
years that followed the pendulum swung
the other way to critiquing and I think
now hopefully we're kind of
leveling out a little bit but I think
you're right there is a hangover from
the the social media era
I think I'm quite scared about AR I mean
we use it in our businesses but um I
think the social media era has has maybe
rightly made us think before we go all
in about consequences and it's funny
seeing the debates in Congress and with
the CEOs taking place before a lot of
this stuff has been built and deployed
now yeah whereas with social media we've
got 10 years in or 15 years in and we
were like oh my god so let's do run the
studies now and see the impact it's
having it's interesting we're going to
see how that plays out yeah are you
writing another book you thinking about
a subject yeah I'm always thinking about
stuff um as I said I've got this
document with like 100 book ideas I'd
need to live 100 lives to write them all
but uh I'm I'm pretty focused on this
one now and some other things but I will
I will start thinking about the next
book proposal soon
Adam thank you thank you for writing
such an incredible book and if you do
end up writing another book I'll be I'll
be the first to buy it because this book
is phenomenal all your books are
phenomenal because they're so accessible
but they're confronting subject matter
that is so as you say has such broad
appeal
um where there doesn't appear to be
solid clear answers yet and I also love
authors like yourself that don't take a
binary approach to things because life
isn't binary in any in any regard and so
being nuanced in
um and personalized I think is is what
you do so well but um is what it's also
what people love so much and you're a
fantastic talker you're a fantastic at
conveying ideas so if you ever want to
start a podcast you know I'd certainly
download it thank you so much Adam it's
an honor to meet you thanks Steven it's
been great thank you
[Music]
oh